---
title: "Machine Learning Methods for Identifying Atrial Fibrillation in 12-lead ECGs"
collection: publications
category: theses
thesis_type: "Master Thesis"
supervisor: "Luca Franco Pavarino"
permalink: /publication/2022-master-thesis
excerpt: 'The work focused on identifying atrial fibrillation through the analysis of 12-lead ECG signals using supervised Machine Learning techniques. Explored and compared the performance of k-Nearest Neighbors, Random Forest, and Multilayer Perceptron classifiers. The study involved preprocessing clinical data, implementing classification models, and evaluating their accuracy in detecting cardiac arrhythmias. Integrated concepts from physiology, signal processing, and computational modeling to enhance understanding and support preventive diagnostics in cardiology.'
date: 2022-11-24
venue: 
slidesurl: 
paperurl: 
bibtexurl: 
citation: "Cucchi, I. (2022). Machine Learning Methods for Identifying Atrial Fibrillation in 12-lead ECGs."
---
This thesis work aims to study the problem of identifying atrial fibrillation; different Machine Learning models are trained for recognizing the pathology through the analysis of the PTB-XL database, discriminating its data between three macro classes. Below is a brief summary of the most relevant contents of each chapter. The chapter 1 presents the heart, the main organ of this study, providing information of its anatomical and physiological nature. Besides, are shown the main functions of cardiac tissue, describing its shape and composition, in order to introduce its essential biology, with particular attention to the electrical processes produced internally by the conduction system. Furthermore, it is illustrated the electrocardiogram, a graphic reproduction of heart’s activity, distinguishing the different waves that compose it and the positions of the electrodes: instruments for detecting electrical currents, determining the 12-lead ecg at the base of the study. Finally, the chapter deals with atrial fibrillation, defining it from a diagnostic and etiological point of view, thus researching the causes and mechanisms which it operates with, and epidemiological, thus observing who and how often is affected by. The chapter 2 introduces Machine Learning, a computer discipline that constitutes the analysis tool used in this work, through the presentation of different models. In order to characterize ML’s structure, in this part of work is defined the classification problem in general terms, in order to provide a common notation for all the algorithms treated later. Then, it is described evaluation metrics from a mathematical point of view, which estimate the goodness of a model in terms of classification and the processes of data preprocessing for their optimization. In the end of the chapter are presented the three models exploited for data training, known in the literature as k-Nearest Neighbors, Random Forest and Multilayer Perceptron. The chapter 3 illustrates the results produced by the various artificial simulations, training the models mentioned above. The main purpose of this thesis work is to evaluate the learning degree of each algorithm in the identification of the pathology, in terms of the previously introduced evaluation metrics, determining the most efficient one. In this part are carried out two types of simulations: one that consider only the data relating to the electrocardiographic signals, applying the previously described normalizations and the other that also takes into account the metadata. At last, a comparison of different results of the simulations, concluding with reflections on the efficiency of the latter.
